We continue to follow the
breaking news out of the Middle
The U.S.
is working to identify
exactly which
militia group
carried out a deadly drone attac
on a small U.S.
outpost in Jordan that killed th
troops and injured more than 30
This happening near the border
with Syria and Iraq.
And joining me now to talk about
CNN military analyst and retired
Air Force Colonel
Cedric Leighton and former Middl
East negotiator for the State
Department, Aaron David Miller.
Colonel, I guess let me go to yo
Your reaction
to this deadly attack on U.S. tr
There have been
these moments
that we've seen
over the last several weeks
where these Iran backed militias
have been wreaking havoc, been a
to U.S. forces in the region.
Obviously, this time
it's much more serious and it ma
bring about a U.S. response.
Yeah, I think it certainly will,
And good to be with you again.
This is a really serious escalat
at this point
and what it has done
because of the deaths
of at least three
American service members
and the injuries of 30 more 30 p
soldiers, it is clearly
raising the ante here.
And the group that did this,
whichever one it was,
is clearly asking for a response
from the U.S.
And what that, of course, means.
It remains to be seen.
But one of the key suspects here
is probably Kataeb
Hezbollah, the group in Iraq.
That is an Iranian main
Iranian proxy there.
I could be one of the other
Iranian proxies,
but it clearly points
to a possible
escalation in that direction.
And before we go to Aaron,
Colonel, just a quick follow up.
Can you tell us more about this
outpost known as Tower 22 in Jor
and the military
installations that are located
in that general area?
This sounds a bit of a remote ou
and I wonder if it raises the qu
about security
at some of these installations w
forces may be vulnerable
to this sort of thing.
Yeah, it certainly does raise
a lot of security questions
and, of course,
force protection,
as we call
security in
the military, is a key
and dominant mission requirement
forces there.
But this base, Tower 22,
is right near the base of our co
Which is in Syria.
So it's
tower 22 is right on the Jordan
Syria border,
but it's also close to the
what they call the tri point
where three countries come toget
in this case Syria, Iraq and Jor
And because of that,
it's in a unique position
where it can oversee
a lot of the smuggling routes
that have in there for thousands
between all of the different are
within Syria and Jordan and Iraq
And it is at a very strategic
location, has provided
a lot of supplies to Al-Tanf,
which is the primary base
in this part of Syria
that has been used against the
ISIS forces
that we fought against
over the last few years.
And, Aaron,
President Biden
has been briefed on the attack.
He's released a statement vowing
to hold those responsible accoun
We're already seeing calls
from Republican lawmakers
for a strike inside Iran.
As a matter of fact,
we talked to
Congressman Adam Smith
at the top of the hour
and he said that
perhaps some
sites in Iran
should be considered
for some sort of proportionate r
What might that do to the situat
that obviously
has been simmering
with a lot of tensions
over the last several weeks?
I mean, obviously,
things could
get way more escalated
if something like that happens.
You know, whether we're on the c
Thanks for having insurance.
Great, Joe Crowley.
Whether we're on the cusp
of a regional war or not, I don'
We're
almost five months in February 7
will be the fifth month of this
And and you're
looking at controlled escalation
to a large degree
across the Israeli-Lebanese bord
And even these these attacks
against American bases and
and troops in Iraq and Syria.
I think the administration on th
has options that run from bad to
And I think there were only two
They're going to respond.
Question
is, are they going to respond
against Iranian Revolutionary
Guard Corps actual
forces in Iraq and or Syria or,
as Adam Smith suggested,
are they going to risk something
that this administration,
none of its predecessors have do
and that is to strike Iranian as
in Iran proper,
which for
the Iranians is a
self-proclaimed red line.
Whether or not
that proves to be the case,
we may actually begin to find ou
The other option,
of course,
is to strike
fast boats and Iranian naval ass
in the Gulf.
But the administration, understa
given the regional hotspots
that the Israeli-Hamas war has g
has a certain amount of risk ave
in their own response.
I mean, they've responded
actually to what, 100 and 6070 a
since October,
maybe a 10th of those we've resp
I think on this one, however,
you're going to see some
you're going to see some firewor
And I think I still think we're
this is not going to trip
the US and Iran
into a major confrontation.
But it certainly raises the stak
Colonel, what do you think?
Can the U.S.
hit Iran
without hitting inside
Iranian territory
as as Aaron is suggesting, and p
strike a balance that sends a me
without getting things out of co
I think it's imperative that the
does that, Jim.
And, you know,
as Aaron was pointing out,
this is you know,
there are several options here.
Most of them are very bad.
But the best option of
of a bad series of choices
is going to be to hit something
that is very important to the Ir
But it is not
something that is strikes
at the poor of the regime
or at the core of
some of their capabilities.
But it would serve as a warning
and to something
like attacking naval outfits
in the Persian Gulf, something l
And it kind of goes up to the li
But, you know,
they could do that
or they could stick
with hitting the proxies
in either Iraq or Syria.
But if there is a hand that is h
that is revealed for, let's say,
the contact
from Tehran,
that that perhaps directed this
then they have to consider
going all that way
to send a message to the Iranian
And, Aaron,
while all of this is unfolding,
the president had sent
the CIA director to Europe in th
of reviving these hostage negoti
to get some kind of deal
going between Israel and Hamas,
to simmer things down.
I wonder,
do you think the Iranians
were trying to blow this up?
They were
trying to
have an impact on on this proces
What do you think?
And could this
could this get worse
if we don't see a deal reached?
Well, it's definitely going to g
It's going to get worse
before it gets worse, I suspect.
But I you know,
I usually am pretty
knowingly negative on these matt
Bill Burns has a very close rela
with Mossad director David Barne
The Israelis actually,
I think, are under an enormous a
of pressure,
rising pressure
from the hostage families,
growing casualties.
The IDF is understanding that
they may well have reached the l
of the most intense kinetic phas
and a pause two months,
which the Israelis could resume
against the Hamas leadership,
would, in fact, to do a couple o
It would allow a surge,
not a dribble of humanitarian as
which is badly needed in the Gaz
It would free
the hundred plus hostages that r
and the return of the 20
or 30 that the Israelis believe
are no longer living either.
Killed on October 7th,
their bodies taken to Gaza
to trade for Palestinian prisone
or died in captivity.
I think it would offer some resp
badly needed.
Will, what's happening in in
with respect to this attack in t
derail that? I don't think so.
I think if Hamas and the Israeli
both want a pause, then the U.S.
is well-positioned,
I think, right now to try to del
But remember,
Middle East
negotiations only have two speed
Jim, is slow and slower.
So this may take some time.
All right,
Colonel Leighton, Aaron David Mi
thanks so much to both of you.
Really appreciate the insights
on an important night.
A lot of
critical things happening,
I think, in the next couple of d
ahead. We'll stay on top of it.
Really appreciate that. Thanks s